updating as per week 7, 8 (#182)
aiidateam/aiida-website: src/blog/gsoc-2026-aiida-natural-language.md

The infrastructure is solid enough to start real testing.
That is what the next phase is for.

---

> **WEEKS 7 & 8: FROM THEORY TO REALITY**

Reviewer: Please use the same format here as for the other weeks: second-level heading with `##` and sentence case, not all caps.

After the midterm evaluation wrapped up, the project shifted in an important way.
I stopped polishing infrastructure and started testing against real data.
This decision changed everything about how I understood the problem.

> The mentor provided access to the Natasha archive, a real AiiDA database containing thousands of Fermi surface and Wannier calculations for metallic structures.

Reviewer: Natasha is just the name of my colleague who sent me the archive. Suggestion:

```suggestion
The mentor provided a real AiiDA archive of roughly 340,000 nodes, containing close to 15,000 Wannier90 calculations and as many Fermi surface calculations.
```

> It was actual research data, not synthetic test cases.

Reviewer: _negative parallelism_ is a tell-tale sign of AI :D would try to rephrase such statements. There are a few in the doc (fine to use AI, ofc, but, should not sound too much like it in the final version at least).

I set up a new AiiDA profile to access it and began asking the kinds of questions a materials scientist would actually ask.

The first round of queries went well.
The Analysis Agent listed processes correctly, diagnosed why calculations had failed, and searched for structures by chemical formula.
I felt confident about the progress.
But then I asked a simple question: how many metallic structures are in this database?

The agent couldn't answer.

> It turned out that materials scientists store critical information as metadata attached to nodes.

Reviewer: I wouldn't generalize here. Other people (users of other workflow managers) might do things differently. It's also a specific way how this information is handled in _this_ archive. So maybe rephrase along the lines of:
"It turned out that in the archive, critical information was registered as metadata attached to nodes, specifically in the node extras."

Just for some background: In AiiDA, it is common that people add useful metadata that one might want to query for later in the extras, as they are still mutable after the nodes are stored in the DB (unlike the node attributes which become immutable).

Whether a structure is metallic or insulating, its crystal symmetry, its bandgap, all of this lives in node extras, custom key-value fields.
The agent had no way to search by this metadata.

> It was a real gap with real consequences.

Reviewer: also sounds like AI

> I built a new tool called `query_nodes_by_extras` to fix it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I first built a new tool called `query_nodes_by_extras` to fix it.
```

It let the agent filter nodes by any metadata field using AiiDA's QueryBuilder.

> Testing against the Natasha data, it returned exactly the right numbers: 5597 metallic structures, 2781 cubic structures, perfectly matching the ground truth from the researchers' own scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Testing against the Wannier archive, it returned exactly the right numbers: 5597 metallic structures, 2781 cubic structures, matching the ground truth from the researchers' own scripts.
```

But solving this one problem revealed a bigger issue.
If I added a new tool every time I discovered a missing query pattern, I would spend forever building special cases.
The approach wasn't sustainable.

> That's when I started thinking about the Execution Agent, the system for helping researchers set up and run new simulations.

Reviewer: Here, the transtition to the execution agent is a bit unexpected. I'd first bring up the generic QueryBuilder tool (it's OK that it's still open, you can link the PR, say it's still under review).

The initial plan was to have the model generate workflow specifications as JSON, validate those specs against AiiDA's schema, then execute them.
It seemed straightforward enough.

Then the mentor asked a question that made me reconsider everything.
What happens when someone installs a new AiiDA plugin tomorrow?
If the agent only knows about hardcoded workflows for Quantum ESPRESSO and VASP, it wouldn't recognize the new plugin.

> The system would be obsolete as soon as it shipped.

Reviewer: Apart from extensibility, we also don't want hard-coded content for specific materials-science codes in our general repo :)

I decided to rethink the entire architecture.
Instead of predefining which workflows exist, I would ask the system to discover them at runtime.
I built tools that dynamically inspect what AiiDA has installed and learn the requirements of any workflow on the fly.
The model no longer needs to know about QE or VASP or SIESTA specifically.
It just asks: what workflows are available?
What do they need?
How do I build inputs for them?

> This required rewriting a lot of code.

Reviewer: I opened a PR that basically moves out the plugin infra from the execution agent PR. We already have aiida itself being extensible via plugins, so we can follow the same mechanisms there.

> I deleted hundreds of lines of hardcoded logic for specific codes and replaced it with generic recursion that handles nested input structures of any depth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I deleted the hard-coded logic for specific codes and replaced it with generic recursion that handles nested input structures of any depth.
```

Also here, one strong suggestion is to use the `get_builder_from_protocol` methods implemented on many workchains (at least the flagship ones our team maintains, e.g., in aiida-quantumespresso), rather than the agent having to figure the whole nested tree of input parameters from scratch.

The submission system now correctly processes workflows with complex hierarchical inputs, not just simple flat parameters.

By the end of week eight, I had 360 tests passing, clean linting, and zero type errors.
The agent was genuinely plugin-agnostic.

> Install a new AiiDA workflow plugin, and the system would discover it and help users run it without any changes to the code.

Reviewer: Maybe be a bit more precise here, that these PRs are still open, but this is the state we are aiming for with them, and where we will end up, once they are merged.

The biggest lesson from these two weeks came from testing against real data.
Isolated testing never would have revealed that the agent couldn't filter by metadata.
And wrestling with actual AiiDA workflow complexity forced me to build abstractions that are far more robust than the initial design.
I moved from a proof-of-concept toward something a real researcher might actually use.

> The work is visible in two pull requests ready for review.

Reviewer: Ah, I see you mention the PRs here. Maybe add also links to them?
